Project Overview

Using a Zynq 7000 platform, we have built a system in which the PL acquires data from an SPI-like interface, and then the PS streams it over UDP to a network destination. Control on the network side is a TCP interface. The sampling rate is 30 kHz; a packet is up to 600 bytes at the full 256-channel (two-cable) config, so the data rate is roughly 9 MB/s per cable (up to ~18 MB/s for all 256 channels).

The special SPI protocol involves having two 16 bit words of data are transmitted from the peripheral to the controller (CIPO) an interleaved way on alternative clock phases (double data rate). There are also two CIPO lines. So the whole interface is SCLK, CS, COPI, CIPO0, and CIPO1. Because of the long cables used, the MISO or CIPO data arrives with some phase delay to the clock. The PL handles this by delaying the latching of the CIPO data relative to the COPI data.

The approach that I've adopted in my verilog code for this is the following - I have a main loop with 80 states that runs at 84 MHz. This is a 4x oversampling of the SPI clock rate of 24 MHz. Data is sampled for the first 74 states into a register, and then depending on a phase variable the correctly delayed CIPO data is extracted. The data is put into a FIFO, which copies the data to a BRAM which is used to transmit this data to the PS. This code is in data_generator_core.sv and CIPO_phase_selector.v. This whole loop is repeated 35 times, so that in one data packet, 35 16-bit COPI commands are sent, and 35 x 2 (because of the double data rate) 16 bit data words are read back from each of the 2 CIPO lines. In addition, the PL sends a 64 bit packet magic header and a 64 bit timestamp, plus 64 bits of digital input (8 bits) and other metadata, plus 8 16 bit external ADC values. So one received data packet has 10 32-bit words of packet header plus the data words. The datapath has since been widened to two cables (dual-port), so the channel-enable mask selects among up to 8 streams — regular and DDR for CIPO0/CIPO1 on each of two cables. At the full 256-channel (0xFF) config that is (2 cables) x (2 CIPO lines) x (2 DDR words) x 35 commands = 280 16-bit words = 140 32-bit data words (256 amplifier channels plus per-stream aux/config readbacks), i.e. a 150-word / 600-byte maximum packet.

The PS controls the PL using an AXI Lite register interface. There are control registers which are latched from PS to PL and status registers which are latched from PL to PS. The register names are extracted in data_generator_core.sv, but the register interface is in axi_lite_registers.v. 

The PS code runs on both cores of the processor. One core is dedicated to the serial debug interface, the other core has a fast loop which does three primary tasks: processing commands which might come over from a TCP network endpoint, reading data from the BRAM, and transmitting this data through UDP to the network. The bulk BRAM read is done by an AXI CDMA (a PL bus master that copies each packet from the capture BRAM into a DDR buffer over the S_AXI_HP0 port) rather than by the CPU — this keeps the PS M_AXI_GP master, which corrupts long burst reads, off the data path. The main code files are main.c, network.c, pl_control.c, and pl_dma.c (the CDMA driver), with main.h defining things.

